PROJECT II.

Write a MATLAB program for finite element analysis of a circular footing on a linearly
elastic, isotropic foundation. The program should employ linear displacement
rectangular (4-node) elements. The program should also be capable of simulating an
elastic modulus profile that increases linearly with depth as follows:
E=E0 + E1y
where E0 is the elastic modulus at the ground surface, and E1 is the rate of increase in
elastic modulus with depth. Assume Poisson’s ratio is constant at all depths.
The program should construct a rectangular mesh comprised of uniform rectangular
elements created from a grid of m nodes in the y-direction and n nodes in the x-direction.
The elements should have a horizontal dimension 2a vertical dimension 2b.
The program should analyze the elastic response for a uniform footing pressure qs, acting
on nf elements beneath the footing.
Inputs should include:
Mesh data: m, n, a, b
Material data E0, E1, 
Load data: qs, nf
The program should be organized in logical sections clearly explained by comment
statements. The sections of the program should include:
Data Input
Mesh Creation
Creation of Global Stiffness Matrix including following sub-sections:
Strain-displacement matrix [B]
Constitutive matrix [C]
Element stiffness matrix using Gauss 2-pt integration in both directions
Imposition of displacement boundary constraints
Construction of Load Vector
Solution by Gauss elimination for displacements
Computation of stresses at each integration point

Once the program is written, perform analyses to find the following:
1. Contours of vertical stress for a uniform unit pressure (qs=1) for =0.35 and constant
E. Compare your numerical solution to the analytical solution for pressure beneath a
circular footing. Check your solution for vertical stresses along the centerline of the
footing.
2. Compute contours of vertical stress for an elastic modulus that increases at a rate
E1B/E0=0.5. Compare to your contours for the solution for a uniform elastic
modulus.
3. Plot contours of the change in mean total stress for undrained loading for a uniform
surface pressure qs = 400 psf, footing diameter B=12 ft, and the soil properties in
Table 1.
4. Plot contours of excess pore water pressure for the loading in Part 3 and soil
properties in Part 3.
5. Compute the initial undrained settlement for the loading and soil properties in Part 3.
6. Estimate the primary consolidation settlement (vertical displacement) at the ground
surface for the loading and soil properties in Part 3 using a stress path analysis
approach.
Table 1. Soil Properties for Parts 3-6.
Property Value
Elastic Modulus at Surface, E0
Elastic Modulus Gradient, E1
Henkel Pore Pressure Coefficient, a
Compression Ratio, CR
Effective Unit Weight, ’

100,000 psf
5,000 psf/ft
1.0
0.25
50 pcf